                         Fourier-space Diffractive Deep Neural Network:
                                       Supplementary Material


           Tao Yan1,*, Jiamin Wu1,*, Tiankuang Zhou1,2,*, Hao Xie1, Feng Xu3, Jingtao Fan1, Lu Fang2,
                                                                           ‡
                                       Xing Lin1,4,†, and Qionghai Dai1,
                 1
                 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, P. R. China
   2
    Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, 518055, P. R.

                                                   China

                     3
                     School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China
       4
        Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA

                                                 90095, USA

                                *
                                These authors contributed equally to this Letter.
                                                              ‡
                          E-mail: †linx2019@tsinghua.edu.cn, qhdai@tsinghua.edu.cn



Supplementary Methods
Training Fourier-space D2NN: We propose to train a diffractive deep neural network (D2NN)

in Fourier-space since every different object will have a very different Fourier transform pattern.

The dual 2f system is used for performing Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform, the

parameters of which determine the optical magnification, modulation resolution, and the size

of a network. Both the saliency detection network and classification network were trained under

a visible wavelength ( λ =532 nm), which offers the network with a high resolution and

integration property. For the task of saliency detection trained with Cell dataset at unit

magnification in the main text (Fig. 2), the N.A. and focal length of the first 2f system was set

to be the same as the second 2f system: N.A.1=N.A.2=0.112, f1= f2=10 mm. Considering the

physical fabrication and N.A. matching, the neuron size of the network was set to be 2 μm to

have sufficient sampling rate for the modulation layer. The five-layer phase modulation

network for saliency detection was trained by packing 800×800 neurons over each layer of the

network, covering an area of 1.6 mm×1.6 mm per layer. During the preparation of Cell dataset,

the pathology slide image of cell type 1 [39], which has the pixel number of 36001×30261, was

divided into 3500 patches with 200×200 pixels for each patch and upsampled two times with
boundary padding for matching the size of a network. We randomly selected 2750 patches as

the training dataset, 250 patches as the validation dataset, and 500 patches as the testing dataset.

All cell images were converted into the grayscale due to the using of a single wavelength. For

the training of saliency detection network with CIFAR-10 dataset [43], we changed the focal

length of the dual 2f system to 2mm and neuron number of each layer to 160×160 (layer size

of 0.32 mm×0.32 mm) while keeping other network settings the same. Specifically, we used

the CIFAR-10 dataset “Cat” category (5000 images, each with a size of 32×32) to train the

network, where images were converted into grayscale and resized to 100 × 100 with the

boundary padding to match the network size. We used the online video sequences [42] and

CIFAR-10 dataset “Horse” category as the testing images. Similarly, for the task of

classification in the main text, we set N.A.1=N.A.2=0.16, f1= f2=1 or 4 mm, with the neuron size

of 1 μm. The number of neurons on each layer of a phase modulation network was set to be

200×200 with zero paddings to match the diameter of the 2f system. The classification network

was trained with the MNIST (Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology)

handwritten digit (0, 1, …, 9) dataset [18], which has 55,000 training images, 5000 validation

images, and 10,000 testing images with each image size of 28×28 pixels. The image size of the

MNIST dataset is upsampled three times with boundary padding to match the network size.

The successive layer distance of both saliency detection and classification Fourier-space

D2NNs was optimized and set to be 100 μm.



Similar to [18], the proposed framework was implemented using TensorFlow machine learning

library (Google Inc.). Both the phase and amplitude of the modulation layer in principle can be

the learnable parameters for each neuron on each layer. In this work, we used the phase-only

modulation due to its simplicity of the physical implementation in contrast to the complex

modulation, where each layer can be approximated as a thin optical element, and the distance

between successive layers decides the receptive field of neurons. The free-space propagation is

implemented with the angular spectrum method. To facilitate the physical fabrication of F-

D2NN with direct laser writing, a sigmoid function was used to constrain the phase coefficient

of each neuron within a certain range, i.e., 0-2 π and 0- π , for saliency detection and

classification networks, respectively. The ground truth for training saliency detection network
was obtained by using the state-of-the-art algorithms, including co-saliency detection algorithm

[27] and robust background detection (RBD) algorithm [30]. The ground truth for classification

network was obtained by setting ten detectors regions (corresponding to ten digits) with each

detector width of 12 μm. The stochastic gradient descent algorithm (Adam optimizer) [1] is

used to back-propagate the errors and update the diffractive layers of the network to minimize

the loss function. With a learning rate of 0.01 and batch size of 10, the training iteration

converged after 100 epochs and 30 epochs for saliency detection network and classification

network, respectively. We implemented the networks using Python version 3.6.0. and

TensorFlow framework version 1.11.0 (Google Inc.). Using a desktop computer (Nvidia

TITAN XP Graphical Processing Unit, GPU, and AMD Ryzen Threadripper 2990WX CPU

with 32 Cores, 128GB of RAM, running with a Microsoft Windows 10 operating system), it

took approximately 20 hours to train the saliency detection and classification networks with the

above-outlined implementation. During the numerical testing, it took 1 minute to inference 100

testing images for Cell dataset and 1 minute to inference MNIST testing dataset.



Optical Nonlinearity Property: The proposed F-D2NN uses coherent illumination as an

energy source to generate the complex optical field propagation and perform complex-value

optical computing. The complex activation function used in this work creates the nonlinear

phase modulation with respect to the intensity variations, which is achieved by employing a

photorefractive crystal (SBN:60) nonlinear material [35, 36]. The photorefractive effect can

lead to this type of optical nonlinear response much stronger than other optical nonlinear effects,

such as the Kerr effect. The required incident light intensity for SBN crystal to turn on the

nonlinearity effect is only at the scale of ~0.1 mW/mm2, and the response time of the SBN

crystal depends on the incident light intensity. Besides, in contrast to the amplitude or intensity

modulations, using phase modulation doesn’t consume energy. The origin of the nonlinearity

is the spatial variant optical intensity, which generates free charge carriers through

photoionization. Free charge carriers then change the local electric field distribution, and the

refractive index is finally shifted accordingly that results in phase modulation [37]. The index

change of SBN can be modeled as: 𝛥𝑛 = 𝜅𝐸𝑎𝑝𝑝 < 𝐼 >/(1+< 𝐼 >), where < 𝐼 > is the

intensity perturbation above a spatially homogeneous background intensity < 𝐼0 >, 𝐸𝑎𝑝𝑝 is
the applied electric field along c axis, and 𝜅 = 𝑛0 𝑟33 (1+< 𝐼0 >) is a constant depending on

the base index of refraction 𝑛0 , the electro-optic coefficient 𝑟33, and < 𝐼0 >. In practical, the

crystal has voltage-dependent nonlinearity. To generate enough strength of nonlinearity and

consider the implementation feasibility, we set the thickness of photorefractive crystal to be 1

mm and voltage on a crystal to be 972 V, with which the phase variation of nonlinear material

is between 0~𝜋 and can be formulated as 𝛥∅(𝐼) = 𝜋 < 𝐼 >/(1+< 𝐼 >).



Although the nonlinear phase modulation property of the crystal with respect to the intensity

variation doesn’t consume energy, we estimate the energy loss of photorefractive crystal from

three main aspects: absorption, reflection, and dark current. (1) Absorption. The absorption

coefficient α of nominally undoped SBN:60 is ~0.1 cm−1 at the wavelength of 532 nm [37],

and the thickness of SBN:60 is ~1 mm in our experimental setup. Therefore, the transmission

rate can be modeled as T = 𝑒 −𝛼𝑑 ~0.99, which means ~1% of optical energy will be absorbed.

(2) Reflection. When the light is incident perpendicular to the crystal surface, the reflection

coefficient caused by the refractive index difference of the air-crystal interface can be calculated

as ((n1 − n2 )/(n1 + n2 ))2 ≈ 0.16, where n1 = 1.00 represents the refractive index of air,

and n2 ≈ 2.33 represents the refractive index of SBN:60. In practical, such reflection can be

reduced to ~1% by an anti-reflective coating. (3) Dark Current. The dark conductivity of

SBN:60 σ𝑑 is ~10−10 Ω−1 cm−1 [37]. Supposing that the crystal size is a × b × c =

2 mm × 2 mm × 1 mm (2mm along c axis), the resistance along the electric field of the crystal

is 𝑅 = b/σ𝑑 ac~1011 Ω. The voltage along c axis 𝑈 is ~1 kV, so the electric power is 𝑃𝐸 =

𝑈 2 /𝑅~0.01 mW. Therefore, if the illumination power is ~10 mW, the energy loss by the dark

current can be ignored compared with the amount of absorption and reflection (2% of the total

power), and the total energy loss of the photorefractive crystal can be estimated as ~0.2mW.
Supplementary Figures




Supplementary Figure S1: All-optical saliency detection with Fourier-space D2NN on a 2

magnification optical system. We demonstrate the success of Fourier-space D2NN for cell

segmentation by training it to perform a saliency detection mapping function. During the

implementation, the focal length of the second 2f system was set to be two times of the first

2f system: 𝑓2 = 2𝑓1 = 20 mm; other design parameters and datasets were set to be the same

as Fig. 2 of the main text. By simply placing the trained Fourier-space D2NN on the Fourier

plane of the designed 2 magnification imaging system, the optical system immediately

performs an all-optical saliency detection of the specimen, which further demonstrates the

potential application of the proposed method in microscopic imaging. The maximum F-measure

of the average precision-recall curves on the result of a testing dataset is 0.464 (Scale bar:

200µm for the first to the third row, 400 µm for the fourth row. Cell scales are optically

magnified.)
Supplementary Figure S2: The performance of five-layer F-D2NN for saliency detection on the

dual 2f system and 4f system configured with a single SBN nonlinear layer and multiple SBN

nonlinear layers. In dual 2f system setting, the Fourier planes of the first and second 2f system

are set to be on the first and last layer of F-D2NN, respectively; on the other hand, the Fourier

planes of two 2f systems can be superposed as a 4f system and set to be in the middle of the F-

D2NN. The multi-SBN configuration is implemented by incorporating the SBN to individual

modulation layer, while the single SBN configuration simplifies the design by placing a single

SBN at the end of modulation layers. The corresponding four different types of configurations
are demonstrated in the left half of (b). The five-layer F-D2NN under four different

configurations are trained on the same pathology slide datasets (Cell Type 1) we used in the

main text for the task of salient object detection, the corresponding average precision-recall

curves on the testing datasets are shown in the right half of (b). The experiment results show

the comparable performance of the dual 2f system and 4f system on 5-layer F-D2NN. On the

other hand, because the significantly increasing of layer distance decreases the effective

diffractive modulation resolution, and the using of multi-SBN nonlinear layer introduces more

optical aberrations, the maximum F-measures of single SBN configurations are 0.653 and 0.651

for dual 2f system and 4f system, respectively, which significantly outperforms the multi-SBN

configurations (0.490 and 0.455 for dual 2f system and 4f system, respectively). The

representative saliency detection results are shown in (a); by using the same testing targets (Cell

Type 2, first column), the F-D2NN results on four different configurations are shown in the last

four columns. We adopted the dual 2f system with a single SBN configuration in this work,

which achieves comparable saliency detection and cell segmentation result (third column) with

respect to the co-saliency detection algorithm (second column). (Scale bar: 200 µm for the first

to the fourth row. Cell scales are optically magnified.)
Supplementary Figure S3: Cell segmentation with Fourier-space D2NN by training it with a

different ground truth saliency detection method. In this experiment, we applied the robust

background detection (RBD) algorithm [29] to generate ground truths for the input pathology

slide images, which were used to train the network for performing the task of salient object

detection. The network settings were kept the same as Figure 2 in the main text. The RBD

algorithm created various false positive regions and sharp boundary for the detected areas due

to the using of boundary connectivity measurement, which placed constraints on the

performance of the Fourier-space D2NN could achieve. We validated the trained network (last

row) by testing the images of Cell Type 1 from the testing dataset (first row) and found that the

proposed optical neural network was able to reject the false positive regions and generated more

meaningful cell detection results (third row) compared with the RBD detection results (second

row). The smoother boundary of results is created by the limited numerical aperture of the

network as an optical imaging system. The maximum F-measure of an average precision-recall

curve over the testing dataset is 0.377. Notice that Fourier-space D2NN was implemented under

single wavelength at the visible spectrum in this work; thus, both RBD and optical saliency

detection methods were using grayscale images for fair comparisons. (Scale bar: 200 µm for

the first to the third row, 400 µm for the fourth row. Cell scales are optically magnified.)
Supplementary Figure S4: Testing the Fourier-space D2NN on the video object segmentation

benchmark dataset, i.e., DAVIS (Densely Annotated Video Segmentation) [38]. To

demonstrate the performance of the proposed approach for saliency detecting and segmenting

of high-speed moving targets, we converted the “ bmx-bumps” video from DAVIS 2016 dataset

into a grayscale video and used it as an input to the trained Fourier-space D2NN of the main

text for salient object detection frame by frame. In this example, we tested the first 30 frames

of the “ bmx-bumps” video sequence as shown in the Supplementary Video 2. The optical

neural network successfully segmented out the foreground moving target (last row) for the input

video sequence (first row); and after the sensor measurement, all-optical saliency detection

result can be further used for tracking, recognition or other computer vision tasks using an

electronic computer. We calculated the average precision-recall curve for Fourier-space D2NN

outputs with respect to the ground truth segmentation results provided in the dataset (second

row) over the tested frames, the maximum F-measure of which is found to be 0.498. The

maximum F-measure of the state-of-the-art convolutional neural network for saliency detection

[27] on the DAVIS dataset with color information is about 0.7. The numerical experimental

results demonstrate the application of the proposed framework for low power consumption,

light-speed detecting, and segmenting of saliency targets that can potentially revolutionize the

imaging and computing pipeline in various computer vision tasks.
Supplementary Figure S5: Testing the Fourier-space D2NN on the benchmark dataset, i.e.,

Extended Complex Scene Saliency Dataset (ECSSD) [39]. We used the trained Fourier-space

D2NN model of the main text for saliency detecting of 1,000 challenging natural images in

ECSSD dataset. Since the network works at a single wavelength, all images were converted

into grayscale as the input. Despite a lack of color information which is one of the major

information the saliency detection based on, our physical network is still able to detect and

segment out the saliency target (third column) for the input image (first column). We calculated

and plotted the average precision-recall curve of the Fourier-space D2NN outputs over the

whole dataset with respect to the ground truth saliency detection results (second column) as

shown in the right half of the figure, and the maximum F-measure of the plot was calculated to

be 0.423. The maximum F-measures of the RBD algorithm [29] and the state-of-the-art method

[25] for saliency detection on ECSSD dataset with color information are 0.718 and 0.787,

respectively. The numerical experimental results validated that the proposed approach can be

used for saliency detecting of complicated natural images under different scenarios at the speed

of light, and the performance of which can be further improved by using multiple wavelengths,

adopting more advanced nonlinearity materials, and increasing the model complexity, etc.
Supplementary Figure S6: The performance of F-D2NN under the phase modulation range of

0~𝜋 and 0~2𝜋 on both tasks of saliency detection and classification. During the training, the

phase modulation coefficients of the network were constrained within a certain range to

facilitate the physical fabrication of modulation layers and provide enough degree-of-freedoms

for training the target transfer function. For the saliency detection task in Fig. 2 of our main

text, we found that constraining the phase modulation range to 0~𝜋 achieves the comparable

performance with 0~2𝜋, as shown in the representative results in (a) and from the precision-

recall curves in (b). The trained F-D2NN modulation layers corresponding to the phase

modulation range of 0~𝜋 and 0~2𝜋 are shown in (c), with which the maximum F-measure

on the testing dataset are 0.616 and 0.613, respectively. The results of saliency detection task

in this manuscript were trained with a phase modulation range of 0~2𝜋. For the task of MNIST

dataset classification in Fig. 4 of our main text, we evaluated both linear and nonlinear Fourier-

space D2NN under the phase modulation range of 0~𝜋 and 0~2𝜋, and found that setting

phase modulation range to 0~𝜋 instead of 0~2𝜋 improves the classification accuracy by 0.4%
and 1.5% for the linear and nonlinear Fourier-space D2NN, respectively. The results of the

classification task in this manuscript were trained with a phase modulation range of 0~𝜋.

(Scale bar: 200 μm for (a) and 400 μm for (c). Cell scales are optically magnified.)
Supplementary Figure S7: The performance of the F-D2NN with respect to the layer number

and the position of the nonlinearity layer (photorefractive crystal, SBN:60) on the MNIST

handwriting digits classification. (a) The increasing of layer number improves the accuracy of

both nonlinear and linear F-D2NN on classifying the MNIST dataset. Although nonlinear F-

D2NN significantly outperforms the linear F-D2NN, using multiple nonlinear SBN layers can

barely improve the classification accuracy but decrease the feasibility of physical

implementation in only Fourier configuration. (b) Setting the nonlinear SBN layer behind

modulation layers to perform the activation function improves the classification accuracy of

both configurations, especially on the only Fourier configuration. (c, d) The convergence plots

of single layer and five-layer F-D2NNs. Compared with a single layer F-D2NN, multilayer

architecture provides higher degree-of-freedom to train the desired transfer function between

the input and output planes, which achieves higher classification accuracy.
Supplementary Figure S8: The sensitivity of D2NN with respect to the fabrication imprecision

(a) and alignment error (b) under different configurations on the task of classifying MNIST

dataset. We compare the sensitivity of Fourier space and real space D2NN under different

numbers of diffractive modulation layers (single-layer, two-layers, and five-layer). Three

different types of configurations, including nonlinear Fourier-space, nonlinear real-space, and

linear real-space configuration, are illustrated in the left of (d). The successive layer distance

of the nonlinear Fourier space and linear real space D2NN is set to be 100 um under the visible

wavelength of 532 nm, with which the multiple diffractive layers of the network is considered

to be fabricated with direct femtosecond laser writing all at once to avoid the layer to layer

alignment. Thus, we consider the fabrication imprecision as the crosstalk between adjacent

pixels during the fabrication by convolving a 3×3 Gaussian kernel with different standard

deviations (σ), as shown in (c), to the trained diffractive modulation patterns during the testing.

The alignment error is considered as the global shifting of the multiple diffractive layers. The

results in (a) and (b) demonstrate that: (1) for nonlinear Fourier-space configuration, five-layer

configuration has a significantly higher accuracy than single-layer configuration, and is also

much more robust compared with two-layer configuration; (2) five-layer nonlinear Fourier-

space D2NN achieves higher accuracy and robustness than five-layer linear real-space

configuration; (3) for five-layer nonlinear configurations, Fourier-space D2NN achieves higher
accuracy and alignment robustness than real-space D2NN, but real-space D2NN is more robust

to fabrication imprecision. Besides, different from Fourier-space D2NN, real-space D2NN

cannot perform saliency detection, as shown in (d).
Supplementary Figure S9: The performance of the five-layer nonlinear F-D2NN sensitivity with

respect to the fabrication imprecision (a, b) and alignment error (c, d) on the task of saliency

detection. Again, we consider the fabrication imprecision as the crosstalk between adjacent

pixels during the direct laser writing by convolving a 3×3 Gaussian kernel with different

standard deviations (σ) to the trained diffractive modulation patterns during the testing. The

alignment error is considered as the global shifting of the diffractive layers. The robustness of

five-layer nonlinear F-D2NN is evaluated by training it on the same pathology slide datasets

(Cell Type 1) we used in the main text. We plotted the average precision-recall curves of the
saliency detection results on testing datasets with different amount of the fabrication and

alignment error, as shown in (b) and (d), respectively; the corresponding maximum F-measures

are calculated and plotted in (a) and (c), respectively. The plots in (a) and (c) demonstrate that

although the performance of saliency detection decreases with the increasing of fabrication and

alignment errors, even under the standard deviation of 0.5 as the fabrication imprecision or

pixel shifting of 1.0 μm as the alignment error, the five-layer nonlinear F-D2NN is still able to

perform decent saliency detection with maximum F-measures of 0.489 and 0.449, respectively.

The representative saliency detection results on target specimen (Cell Type 2) under the

standard deviation of 0.3 and 0.5 as well as pixel shifting of 0.6 μm and 1.0 μm are demonstrated

in (e). (Scale bar: 200 μm. Cell scales are optically magnified.)
